--------------------
Setting up the game:
--------------------

Select a color. You get 5 settlements, 4 cities, 15 roads.
Place your 2 roads and your 2 settlements on the game board.
Then you receive resources for each terrain hex around your starting settlement.
Your resource cards are hidden from other players.
Important:
Settlements and cities may only be placed at the corners of the terrain hexes--never along the
edges.
Roads may only be placed at the edges of the terrain hexes--1 road per edge.
The Distance Rule means many intersections along roads will remain unoccupied.

--------------
Turn overview:
--------------

Either the oldest player goes first or it is decided with a dice roll (if the ai plays).
On your turn, you can do the following in the order listed:
- You must roll for resource production. The result applies to all players.
- You may trade resource cards with other players and/or use maritime trade.
- You may build roads, settlements or cities and/or buy development cards.
- You may also play one development card at any time during the turn.
Then your turn ends and the player to your left begins his/her turn.

------------------
The Turn in Detail
------------------

1. Resource Production

You begin your turn by rolling both dice.
The sum of the dice determines which terrain hexes produce resources.
Each player who has a settlement on an intersection that borders a terrain hex marked with the
number rolled receives 1 resource card of the hex's type.
If you have 2 or 3 settlements bordering that hex, you receive 1 resource card for each
settlement.
You receive 2 resource cards for each city you own that borders that hex.
If there are not enough of a given resource in the supply to fulfill everone's,
production, then no one receives any of that resource during that turn (unless it only
affects 1 player).

2. Trade

Afterwards, you may trade freely (using either or both types of trades below) to gain needed resource cards:

a) Domestic Trade

On your turn, you can trade resource cards with any of the other players. You can announce which resources you need an what you are willing to trade for them.
The other players can also make their own proposals and counter offers.
Important:
Players may only trade with the player whose turn it is. The other players may not trade among
themselves.

b) Maritime Trade

You can also trade without the other players! During your turn, you can always trade at 4:1 by
putting 4 identical resource cards back in their stack and taking any 1 resource card of your
choice for it.
If you have a settlement or city on a harbor, you can trade with the bank more favorably: at
either a 3:1 ratio or, in certain harbors, 2:1 (trading the resource type shown).
Important:
The 4:1 trade is always possible, even if you do not have a settlement on a harbor.

3. Buildings and Construction

Now you can build. Through building, you can increase your victory points, expand your road
network, improve your resource production, and/or buy useful development cards.
To build, you must pay specific combinations of resource cards (see the Building Costs Card).
Take the appropriate number of roads settlements and/or cities from your supply and place them
on the game board.
Development cards are hidden in your hand.
You cannot build more pieces than what is available in your pool-- a maximum of 5 settlements,
4 cities and 15 roads.

a) Road Requires: Brick & Lumber

A new road must always connect to 1 of your existing roads, settlements or cities.
Only 1 road can be built on any given path.
The first player to build a continuous road (not counting forks) of at least 5 road segments
receives the special card Longest Road.
If another player succeeds in building a longer road than the one created by the current owner
of the Longest Road card, he immediately takes the special card (and its 2 victory points).
In this case, there is a 4 victory point swing!

b) Settlement Requires: Brick, Lumber, Wool & Grain

Take special note of the Distance Rule: you may only build a settlement at an intersection if
all 3 of the adjacent intersections are vacant (i.e, none are occupied by any settlement or
cities--even yours).
Each of your settlements must connect to at least 1 of your own roads.
Regardless of whose turn it is (i.e during any production phase), when a terrain hex produces
resources, you receive 1 resource card for each settlement you have adjacent to that terrain
hex.
Each settlement is worth 1 point.

c) City Requires: 3 Ore & 2 Grain

You may only establish a city by upgrading one of your settlements.
Cities produce twice as many resources as settlements.
You acquire 2 resource cards for an adjacent terrain hex that produces resources.
Each city is worth 2 points.

d) Buying a Development Card Requires: Ore, Wool & Grain

There are 3 different kinds of these cards: knight, progress, and victory point.
Each has a different effect.
Development cards never go back into the supply, and you cannot buy development cards if the
supply is empty.
Development cards are hidden until you use them, so your opponents can't anticipate your play.

4. Special Cases

a) Rolling a 7 and Activating the Robber

If you roll a 7, no one receives any resources.
Instead, every player who has more than 7 resource cards must select half (rounded down) of
his resource cards and return them to the bank.
Then you must move the robber. Proceed as follows:
(1) You must move the robber immediately to the number token of any other terrain hex or to
the desert hex.
(2) Then you steal 1 (random) resource card from an opponent who has a settlement or city
adjacent to the target terrain hex.
If the target hex is adjacent to 2 or more player's settlements or cities, you choose which
one you want to steal from.
Important: If the production number for the hex containing the robber is rolled, the owners
of adjacent settlements and cities do not receive resources.
The robber prevents it.

b) Playing Development Cards

If you want to play a development card, put it face up on the table.
That card, however, may not be a card you bought during the same turn (except for a victory
point card)!

-------------
Knight Cards:
-------------

If you play a knight card, you must immediately move the robber.
See 4.a) above and follow steps 1 and 2.
Once played, knight cards remain face up in front of you.
The first player to have 3 knight cards in front of himself receives the special card
Largest Army, which is worth 2 victory points.
If another player has more knight cards in front of him than the current holder of the
Largest Army card, he immediately takes the special card and its 2 victory points.

---------------
Progress Cards:
---------------

If you play a progress card, follow its instructions.
Then the card is removed from the game.

--------------------
Victory Point Cards:
--------------------

You must keep victory point cards hidden.
You may only reveal them during your turn and when you are sure that you have 10 victory
points--that is, to win the game.
You may play any number of victory point cards during your turn, even during the turn you
purchase them.

----------------
Ending the game:
----------------

If you have 10 or more victory points during your turn, the game ends and you are the
winner!
If you reach 10 points when it is not your turn, the game continues until any player
(including you) has 10 points on his turn.

